John,
* Emphasize people.
* Be concise, get to the point.
* Use visuals, headings, and lists when necesary.
* Be open about making mistakes.
* Promote discussion, don't just recount a sequence of events.


DESIGNING WITH VISION IN MIND

The Need for Vision

If design is thinking made visual, vision is the catalyst for thought.

Simply put, vision determines the purpose and priorities of a project; without it, you cannot create anything meaningful because you don’t know what problems you’re working toward solving or what audience you’re even trying to reach. Designers need clearly defined goals and guidelines to abide by, or it is almost impossible to create something that satisfies everyone involved.

It took me months of designing, redesigning, and re-redesigning my blog for this realization to sink in. I assumed making a personal website would be pretty straightforward. Just throw together some copy to fill the obligatory Home, About, Blog, and Contact pages, and maybe slap a hamburger menu on top of everything at the end. Easy, right?

Except that it wasn't. Lack of direction plagued every effort I made, and with each new attempt, things never managed to feel quite right. I expected good design to magically come together in the browser, completely ignoring the fact that design revolves around solving problems. I couldn't be happy with the decisions I was making because I didn't have any explanations to justify them. Without a plan to influence my actions, I was hopelessly lost. I needed a well-defined vision.


Thoughtful Reduction

"I’d love to see front end designers and developers blogging more about problems they faced and how they solved them."

— Dave Rupert

In a single sentence, Dave Rupert summarizes the main goal behind my personal website: write about the problems I encounter and discuss the techniques I use to overcome them.

With that idea firmly in mind, I began writing an outline of my other vision in order to guide my decisions during the design process soon to follow.

[SCREENSHOT OF GOALS w/ link]?

Here are my goals:

* Explain my design process and encourage others to do the same.
* Help people learn.
* Make meaningful connections in the industry.

By documenting exactly what I want to accomplish with this website and specifically whom I want to reach, I found myself able to tackle any design dilemna by asking, "Which of these decisions is the most consistent with my vision?" and then moving forward from there. 

And then, by establishing guidelines and sticking to them, things  finally started going my way.


Getting Things Done... Eventually

I'll be honest: I'm still in the "make everything a rectangle" phase of my web design career. Most of my time at work is spent writing vanilla CSS to style numerous modules across a handful of web applications. Usually medium-sized, rectangular modals containing small, rectangular input fields and maybe a couple small, rectangular buttons for good measure.

Unless I sketch things out on paper first, everything I design is going to be deritive of the things I make at work. These early attempts were attempted entirely in the browser, without any prior planning. Definitely a step backward in the design process.

[SCREENSHOTS OF PROGRESS]

A friend of mine gave me some insightful feedback during class one day, pointing out the lack of distinction between narrow and wide versions of the site. The responsive design changed only font-size rules, and the overall layout and aestetic seemed particularly uninspired.

Taking his useful criticims in mind, I decided to reference to my vision outline once more, causing me to realize a few misteps I had taken along the way.

I had been toying around with with the concept of responsive footnotes for a while. They fall at the bottom of a page on small screens and browsers without JavaScript support, then move alongside main text on larger displays. I like the idea and haven't seen it used anywhere else on the web, giving it value beyond its usefulness.

// Started too early, designed in the browser, too many rectangles, ambiguous mobile/dektop views